Evolution (BIOL 4230) -- Exam 3 Study Guide
Chapters 3, 4, 8, 13, 14, 17, 18
1. History of Life
Key Concepts:

    · Earth's age: 4.568 billion years
             o Likely formed from a proto-planetary circumstellar disk
                       Circum stellar disk ­ ring shaped accumulation of matter (dusk, gas,
                           asteroids) that orbit around a star. This material can form planets
             o Earth's crust formed as it cooled over millions of years
             o Vapor and other gasses formed Earth's water and atmosphere
             o Earth was bombarded with debri from the original stellar disk - moon formed
             o Special Creation: 6,000 years
             o Charles Darwin ­ several billion years old
                       Based on rates of sediment accumulation on river banks, sediment
                           accumulation and erosion on a stretch of ridges and valleys in England ­
                           concluded that if formed over ~300 million years

             o Lord Kelvin ­ about 20 million years old
                       Based on cooling rates of rocks in mines.
                       Since hot rocks cooled at a steady rate, you can use the current
                           temperature to estimate how long it was been cooling ­ interior rocks
                           would be best to look at.

             o Modern physicists ­ 4.568 billion years
                       Based on raidoactive isotopes

    · Evolutionary Timeline:
             o Ordovician (488­444 mya): Early bony fishes + land plants
             o Silurian (444­416 mya): First land animals (e.g., millipedes)
             o Devonian (416­359 mya): Age of fishes + early tetrapods
             o Permian (299­251 mya): Origin of reptiles + modern mammals
· K-T Boundary: Major extinction event caused by asteroid impact

Key Terms:

· Radiometric Dating -- Ages rocks using radioactive decay rates

o Isotopes: variant of a chemical element that differs in neutron number

o Radioactive isotopes

             Unstable

             Emit radioactive particles

             Decay into a daughter isotope at a constant rate

             Decay rate not affected by the environment

o Half life - amount of time it takes for 50% of parent isotope to decay into
    daughter isotope

             Parent  daughter isotope Half life

             Rubidium  Strontium                         47 billion years

             Uranium  Lead                               4.5 billion years

             Potassium  Argon                            1.3 billion years

             Carbon-14  Nitrogen-14      5,730 years

             In many cases, more than one isotope system can be used on the same
                rocks or fossils, providing an independent check on the date

                                         To calculate age of rocks, we need
                                         to know:

                                             1) Half life of parent isotope
                                             2) Current ratio of

                                                  parent/daughter isotope in
                                                  the rock
                                         Assume that the ratio of daughter to
                                         parent isotopes are known at the
                                         time the rock was form
                                         This can be tested with potassium-
                                         argon dating using volcanic rocks
                                         (we know when they are formed).
                                         Data from recent lava flows shows
                                         that when rocks are formed the ratio
                                         is 100%:0%
· Biomarkers -- Earliest chemical signs of life (~3.8 bya) ­
         Biomarkers are molecular evidence of life.
             · DNA fragments
             · Isotopic ratios
             · Molecules
            (lipids, pigments like okenane)
         o The only carbon from early earth (lifeless) would have been from lifeless sources
             ­ like volcanos
         o Carbon has a different isotopic composition when formed organically vs
             inorganically
         o Rocks in oldest geological formations
                   Resemble mounds of bacterial colonies alive today in shallow seas
                   Called stromatolites
                   Form when aggregations of micro-organisms (biofilms) trap sediment
                   Stromatolite fossils are common in Precambrian rocks
                   As early as 3.45 billion years ago
Last Universal Common ­ Ancestor Probably 3.5 ­ 3.8 bya
             o History of life is domincated by branchings
             o Last universal common ancestor all extant species

3.5 billion year old rock with fossil Archaea
         · Archaea ­ single celled organisms with many forms of metabolism.
         · Biochemical features not found in bacteria or Eukaryotes
         · Evidence comes from biologically-produced methane from rocks in Australia

2.6 billion year old rock with fossil bacteria
         · Resembles photosynthetic cyanobacteria
         · Coincides with first evidence for atmospheric oxygen

             Turns light energy into chemical energy with oxygen as byproduct
1.8 billion year old fossil Eukarya

    Eukaryotes -
         · Single celled, but 100 times larger than bacteria
         · Eukaryotes diversified over then next 1 billion years
         · Diverse ways of obtaining energy
Insights in the evolution of multicellularity
    o Dictylostelium discoides ­ soil Eukaryote - Slime molds, unicellular organisms that eat
         bacteria
    o Many single celled organisms live in clumps of films (Biofilms) and send signals to one
         another that regulate growth and activity
    o Slime molds, unicellular organisms that eat bacteria. When prey runs out, it joins with
         other individuals and forms slug-like mass that crawls through the soil. Produces a stalk
         with a ball of spores

Early animals
         First animals ­ Sponges
                  650-635 MYA
                  100 million years before Cambrian
                  Share 1000's of genetic markers with other animals
         Ediacaran period (575-535 mya)
                  Earliest definitive animal fossils
                  Multicellular communities dominated the World's ocean
                  Some share traits with extant animals, but others may not be animals
         Many of these animal forms disappeared by the Cambrian period
Cambrian period (542-488 mya)
         Appearance of recognizable forms of animals
         520 million years ago
         Earliest arthropod fossils
         Chordate fossils (notochord)
         Sea squirts (tunicates) | Trilobites endured until 251 MYA

Burgess Shale ­ Canadian rockies
         · 505 million years ago
         · Shallow reef next to steep escarpment
         · Mudslides captured animals
         · Anoxic conditions favored fossilization of soft tissues
         · Snapshot of entire ecosystem
         · >65,000 specimens, 93 species
                  · Lagerstätte
         · Cambrian fauna

Ordovician period (488-444 mya) - Early bony fishes and land plants
         Earliest known fossils of land plants (475 mya)
         Resemble mosses and liverworts

Silurian period (444-416 mya) - Earliest land animals
         Earliest known animal fossil on land (428 mya - millipede)
         But fossilized tracks of invertebrates date by 480 mya

Devonian period (416-359 mya) - Age of fishes, early tetrapods
         400 mya - earliest known fungus fossils
         385 mya ­ Tree-like plants
         370 mya - earliest fossils of vertebrates with legs (tetrapods)
         380 mya ­ large predatory fish
Carboniferous period (359-299 mya) - Age of amphibians, origin of mass coal deposits
         Land plants diversified
         Land vertebrates (Amphibians) diversified
Permian period (299-251 mya) ­ First reptiles
More diversification! - ~300-280 mya ­ divergence of synapsids and sauropsids
Sauropsida: reptiles (including dinosaurs & birds)
Synapsida: lineage of tetrapods that gave rise to mammals
    · Modern looking mammals arose ~200 mya in the Jurassic

                                                            A. Anapsid
                                                            B. Synapsid
                                                            C. Diapsid

Triassic Period (250-202 mya)
         230 mya ­ earliest known fossils of dinosaurs: a new lineages of reptiles
         Dinosaur fossils dominated up to about 65 mya
Jurassic Period (202-145 mya)
         Diversification of dinosaurs
         Common ancestor of living mammals (200-180 mya)
         150 mya ­ Birds arose (lineage within Dinosauria)

Cretaceous Period (145-65 mya)
         ~132 mya - Rise of forests by flowering plants
         Flowering plants dominated ­ coincided with diversity of insects
         Coevolution of plants and pollinators likely led to diversification of flowering plants
         Cretaceous-tertiary
                  Asteroid crash - Age of rocks ~66 million years old
                           High levels of iridium (rare on Earth, but rich in asteroids)
                           Calculated size based on iridium deposits (~10 mile diameter)
                           Energy of 100 trillion tons of TNT (2 million times greater than most
                           powerful thermonuclear bomb)
                           Chicxulub crater matches the size estimate and dating
                  Completely changed Earth's climate
                  Extinction of dinosaurs and 2/3 of other species

Cenozoic Era (65 mya to present)
         Opened new niches resulting in diversification of other lineages
         50 mya ­ earliest known primate fossils
         20 mya ­ earliest fossils of Apes and land grasses diversify
         7 mya ­ earliest known hominin fossils
         195,000 years ago ­ oldest known fossils of Homo sapiens

How did life orginate?
· Chemists and physicists are actively working on how life arose from inorganic matter -
    abiogenesis

· Conditions of the early Earth
         o No oxygen in the atmosphere - Methane, hydrogen, ammonia, water, CO
         o Primary inputs of energy - Lightning, Ultraviolet radiation, Volcanic eruptions,
             Cosmic rays
                   Cosmic rays ­ high energy charged particles that originate in space and
                      hit the Earth
         o Possible extraterrestrial inputs?
                   Carbon, purines, pyrimidines
                   Enriched the prebiotic soup?

                                                       Stanley Miller & Harold Urey - Testing the
                                                       plausibility of the of the prebiotic soup
                                                       hypothesis
                                                       Prebiotic soup hypothesis ­ pools of
                                                       molecules that existed in liquid form before
                                                       life arose
                                                       Miller ­ Urey Experiment
                                                       Production of over 20 common amino
                                                       acids! Some of the basic building blocks of
                                                       life - Glycine, alanine, valine

                            Adenine and guanine are purines
                            Cytosine, thymine and uracil are pyrimidines

· But how were amino acids joined?
         o Sydney Fox & colleagues (1977):
                   Mixed different amino acids at high temperatures (120C) and lacking
                      water
                   Placed mixture into water
         o Result:
                       strung together in a peptide-like structure, but with weak and unstable
                           bonds

         o Claudia Huber & colleagues (1997)
                       Bonds are stable if carbon monoxide is used

RNA World Hypothesis
         o Essential components of RNA likely existed in the prebiotic soup
                  o Ribose
                  o Phosphate
                  o Purines: adenine, guanine
                  o Pyrimidines: cytocine, uracil

         o Process of life taking place "in a warm little pond, with all sorts of ammonia and
             phosphoric salts, light, heat, electricity, etc. present, so that a protein compound was
             chemically formed ready to undergo still more complex changes"
                           -Darwin 1871

Fossil record provides clues - But it is not perfect!
    1) Earth is about 4.5 billion years old.
    2) Simple amino acids can be formed from inorganic material.
    3) Earliest signs of life (biomarkers) occur about 3.8 billion years ago.
    4) Multicellularity evolved many independent times, perhaps via "cooperative behaviors"

         among cells.
    5) Fossil record provides clues to the history of life, but it isn't perfect.
    6) K-T boundary marks an extinction event due to asteroid crash.
Potential Exam Qs:
    1. What is the significance of the K-T boundary?
    2. How does radiometric dating work?
    3. Key evolutionary milestones of the Devonian?
2. Phylogenetics
Key Concepts:

    · Phylogenetic trees map evolutionary relationships using shared traits (synapomorphies)
                            Evolution is represented as a branching
                            pattern (not a ladder of progress)

                            Phylogenetic tree ­ visual
                            representation of the evolutionary history
                            of species, populations or genes (or other
                            taxonomic levels)

                            The evolutionary history of a group is
                            called its phylogeny

                                 Tree thinking - Components of a
                                 phylogenetic tree (or phylogeny)
                                 Tips: terminal ends of an
                                 evolutionary tree (species,
                                 populations, molecules)
                                 Branches: Lineages evolving
                                 through time between divergence
                                 events (speciation)
                                 Nodes: The point where a lineage
                                 splits (a speciation event)
                                 Root: Ancestor from which all other
                                 nodes descend
                                 Clade: An organism and all of its
                                 descendents
                                 Lineages can be removed or
                                 collapsed without changing
                                 phylogenetic relationships
                                 Sister taxa: Lineages that diverged
                                 from the same immediate ancestral
                                 node
                                 Clade: An organism and all of its
                                 descendents

Hypothetical snail example  Hypothetical snail example
    · Current island 1 snails are
         not the ancestors of island 3
         & 4 snails

    · Evolutionary forces don't
         stop after a divergence event

    · Populations on island 3 & 4
         are more closely related to
         each other than either is to
         the island 1 population

Phylogenies can be represented in
many ways
Might give the impression that
humans are the endpoint...
But that is not the case
                                                                   A tree of life

    Phylogeny and taxonomy
    Early naturalists (Linnaeus) named and classified organisms
    Used shared characteristics
    Essentially what taxonomists do today
    Systematics: Scientific field devoted to classification of organisms
· Synapomorphy: A shared derived character. Inherited by all descendents of an ancestor
· Taxonomy should reflect phylogeny

    Taxonomic groups are legitimate only if they represent the ancestor and all of their
    descendents
monophyletic group                          Paraphyletic group

                    monophyletic
                    group

                    Paraphyletic group

Monophyletic group

    An entire clade is also a monophyletic group

· Monophyletic group: A group that represents all the descendents from a common
    ancestor
· Paraphyletic group: A group that includes a common ancestor, but NOT all of its
    descendents
                                                             Amniotes ­ group of tetrapods that have
                                                             a sac in which the embryo develops

    Importance of synapomorphies
    Shared characters that are ancestral to a group are not informative for defining
    relationships within that group
    Synapomorphies are needed
     - evolved in the immediate ancestor of a clade and were inherited by all descendents
    Cladistics: phylogenetic methods used to construct phylogenies by using shared derived
    characteristics (synapomorphies)
How do we reconstruct phylogenetic
relationships?
A hypothetical example using insect
characters
1) Create a character matrix showing
character states for each taxa

Principle of Parsimony: a criterion for
selecting among alternative patterns
based on minimizing the total amount of
change or complexity
Most parsimonious tree is that with
the fewest evolutionary steps
Important! - A phylogenetic tree is a
hypothesis that can be tested with
further evidence

             · Such as comparing
                  molecular versus
                  morphological trees

Most parsimonious tree is that with
the fewest evolutionary steps
T7 virus infects E. coli

Homoplasy: Character state
similarity, but NOT due to shared
descent (i.e., not a homology)
Two types of homoplasies:
Evolutionary reversals: the reversal
of a derived character state back to
its ancestral state
Convergent evolution: The
independent origin of similar traits in
separate evolutionary lineages,
typically due to similar environmental
pressures
                                                          Homoplasy can create the mistaken
                                                          impression that two species are
                                                          closely related when they are not
                                                          T7 virus infects E. coli
                                          Convergent evolution and parsimony
Camera eye of vertebrates and octopus

Examples of reversals and convergence
Examples of reversals and convergence - Limblessness in squamate reptiles
(snakes & lizards)

Vertebrate transition to land: fins to limbs
         Coelacanths are one of the closest living relatives of tetrapods
         Known only as fossils up to 1938
         Thought to have been extinct in the late Cretaceous

Coelacanth fins are homologous to tetrapod forelimb

Fossil record should document transition from fins to forelimbs
Other living lobe-finned fish

Phylogenies generate hypotheses
  Scientists (Ted Daeschler and Neil Shubin) predicted where transitional fossils would
  be found

        Searched mid-Devonian rocks in Northern Canada

   Appropriate age and habitat

  Tiktaalik: transitional fossil between fish and tetrapods - Tiktaalik forelimbs share
  more homologies with tetrapods

           Important characters:

· Weight-bearing elbows

· Bending wrist

· Neck

· Loss of bony operculum
· Species Concepts:
         o Biological -- based on gene flow
         o Morphospecies -- based on physical differences
         o Phylogenetic -- based on evolutionary history
                              Phylogeny reveals how tetrapod traits evolved
                              over time
                              Phylogenies help us track evolutionary
                              changes in traits

                              Example using the evolution of feathers and
                              flight in birds

                               Archaeopteryx, discovered in 1860, dates to
                                                    145 mya

                              Feathers evolved before flight
                              Living birds share many skeletal similarities
                              with theropod dinosaurs
                              Early theropods did not use feathers for
                              flight (arms too short)
                              Feathers may have had functions other
                              than flight

                                  · Species recognition
                                  · Mate attraction (color)
                                  · Insulation
                                  · Egg incubation
                              Flight stroke may have evolved before they
                              could even fly, as a means to run faster when
                              capturing prey or evading predators.

                              Dinosaur nesting behavior suggests possible
                              use of feathers for insulation

Oviraptor discovered in 1993
Figure 4.30 A: An arm bone (ulna) from a
theropod dinosaur called Velociraptor. (The
portion of bone outlined in the red box is
magnified in B.) B: Regularly spaced bumps
on the surface of the bone resemble quill
nodes (knobs) on the bones of living birds, as
shown in C. D­F: Details of a turkey vulture
ulna, with feathers attached to quill nodes.

Velociraptor arm shows feather attachment
(A)

Flight evolved after feathers
The function of feathers changed
Exaptation: A trait that originates
performing one function, but is later co-
opted for a new function
Flight stroke may have evolved to help run
from predators or capture prey

Another example of an exaptation
Swim bladders are homologous with lungs.
Early lung (sac connected to the gut) was
co-opted into a buoyancy organ.

In early fish, lungs likely functioned as a
way to gulp air from the surface to
supplement oxygen intake, especially in
low-oxygen waters. Tetrapods (amphibians,
reptiles, birds, and mammals) adapted
their lungs for respiration, while many fish
modified their lungs into swim bladders for
buoyancy.
Argument over the origin of the lung.
Key Terms:
Synapomorphies -- Shared derived traits that define those groups

    1) Phylogenetic relationships are reconstructed using shared derived characteristics
         (synapomorphies)

    2) A monophyletic group includes all the descendents from a common ancestor.
    3) Homoplasy is a shared character state, but NOT due to common ancestry (convergence &

         reversal).
    4) Phylogenies are hypotheses that can be further tested.
    5) Phylogenies can help us track evolutionary changes in traits.

Potential Exam Qs:
    1. Advantages/limitations of the biological species concept?
    2. How do synapomorphies build phylogenetic trees?
    3. Compare all 3 species concepts

    4. Species Concepts & Reproductive Isolation
What is a species?

    ~25 different definitions
Differ somewhat in their assumptions, but generally agree that:

    1. Species consist of groups of interbreeding individuals that share a common ancestry
    2. Species are evolutionarily independent units ­ different species follow different

         trajectories through time
Phylogenetic species concept

    · The smallest possible groups whose members are descended from a common ancestor
         (monophyletic)

    · Possess defining or derived characteristics (synapomorphies) that distinguish them from
         other groups
Some problems
    · Traits that are used don't have to be ecological or physiologically significant
    · Often divides organisms up into fine-grained species categories
    · Established phylogenies are not available for most groups

Morphospecies concept

    · Species defined on basis of measurable morphological differences
    · Difficult to apply in some groups (Bacteria, archaea, fungi)
    · Used mostly with fossils, but paleontologists need to be careful (no color, soft tissue

         or behavior present)
    · Some problems
    · Differences used to classify species can be defined arbitrarily and can very among

         scientists
VP = VG + VE

Biological species concept
    · Groups of interbreeding natural populations
    · Reproductively isolated from other such groups
    · Useful because definition focuses on the speciation process
    · Other concepts help recognize species, but this definition focuses on how
         populations are kept separate

Some problems
    · Reproductive isolation can't be tested on fossil species
    · This concept doesn't apply to asexual species
    · This concept has difficulties with hybridizing species

General lineage species concept
Species are metapopulations - Group of spatially separated populations that interact at
some level (genetic exchange)
Various populations exchange alleles frequently enough to be treated as the same
evolutionary lineage
Individuals within the metapopulation all share the same gene pool, which remains fairly
consistent over time
Metapopulations

Gene flow: transfer of alleles from one population to another
No single definition fits all taxa
Biological species concept: Looks at gene flow
Morphospecies concept: Looks at morphological differences
Phylogenetic species concept: Looks at synapomorphies that define monophyletic groups
General lineage species concept: Looks at allele exchange frequency to define the same
evolutionary lineages
In many cases, all concepts will agree on species boundaries
Key Concepts:
    · Reproductive isolation = the engine of speciation
    · Prezygotic Barriers (before fertilization): temporal, behavioral, mechanical
    · Postzygotic Barriers (after fertilization): hybrid inviability, hybrid sterility

Three step process of speciation
     1. Creation of a barrier to gene flow
          between populations
     2. Genetic and ecological divergence
     3. Reproductive isolation: Barriers
          prevent or limit reproduction between
          populations

Mechanisms of geographic isolation
         1. Dispersal and colonization
         Dispersal (movement) splits a species'distribution into two isolated ranges and
         discourages or prevents gene flow between them

2. Vicariance
Geological split of a species'distribution into two or more isolated ranges, discouraging or
preventing gene flow between them

 Reproductive isolating barriers
     · Prezygotic
               · Pre-mating
               · Post-mating
     · Postzygotic

Prezygotic isolating mechanisms (pre and post mating):
    · Prevent sperm from one species from fertilizing eggs of another species
    · Due to differences in genetics, behavior, physiology, ecology

Pre-mating barrier
Potential mates live sympatrically, but don't encounter one another

    · Habitat isolation (ecological barrier)
    · Temporal isolation
 Pre-mating barrier

Post-mating barriers, but before fertilization
Mechanisms that impede gene flow after sperm or pollen has been transferred, but before
fertilization
Courtship dances while mating in insects:
Sperm less likely to fertilize egg if male carries out the wrong courtship
Gametic incompatibility:
Occurs when sperm or pollen from one species fails to penetrate and fertilize the egg of another
species

    · Biochemistry of sperm and female reproductive tract
    · Species-specific proteins on sperm affect attachment to egg

Post-zygotic barriers
Postzygotic isolating mechanisms:
    · Prevent fertilized zygotes from successfully developing and reproducing
    · Due to differences in genetics, behavior, physiology, ecology

Hybrids may have reduced fitness
    · Embryos with 2 species for parents may fail to develop
    · Even if they have same genes, alleles of those genes may not function together
    · Hybrids have defective sperm (sterile)

Mule sterility
    · Hybrid mules are sterile and can't breed with horses or donkeys
    · Horse genes cannot flow into the donkey population (and vice versa)
    · Sterility means that horses and donkeys are distinct species

Sympatric speciation in progress

An example of Ecological Speciation
    · In North America, flies only used fruits from Hawthorn trees
    · But apple trees were introduced about 400 years ago
    · Flies first observed using apple trees 140 years ago
    · Some flies shifted to using apples ­ why?
Sympatric speciation in progress

Hawthorn flies had pre-existing genetic variation for emergence
Allowed some individuals to shift to the time when apples are produced
Benefits of apple laying

    · Reduced competition
    · Avoided attacks from parasitoid wasps
Selection favored alleles for earlier emergence, resulting in divergence from Hawthorn flies
Allopatric speciation by geographic isolation
Allopatry: populations are in separate, non-overlapping geographic areas
 General model
 Step #1: Creation of a barrier to gene flow
 between populations
 Step #2: Genetic and ecological divergence
 Step #3: Reproductive isolation
 Step #4: Reinforcement: Increases
 reproductive isolation through selection
 against hybrid offspring
Allopatric speciation by dispersal
1. Dispersal and colonization
Dispersal (movement) splits a species'distribution into two isolated ranges and discourages or
prevents gene flow between them
What would happen under a linearly-ordered history of colonization?

Hawaiian crickets allow us to test what would happen under a linearly-ordered history of
colonization?

    · 37species of endemic crickets in Hawaii (Laupala sp)
    · Volcanic islands formed by movement of Earth's crust over a hotspot
    · Earth's crust moving west across hotspot
Dispersal and Speciation in Hawaiian crickets
Key Terms:
    · Speciation -- Formation of new distinct species
    · Viable Hybrids -- Offspring that survive but have reduced fitness
    · There are several different types of isolating barriers to gene flow that can facilitate
         speciation

    · New species can arise in allopatry and in sympatry
    · Dispersal and vicariance are two mechanisms of geographic isolation
    · Historical processes have also influenced present-day distributions of organisms
    · Phylogeography ties together phylogenetic relationships with geography to understand

         historical influences on distributions of species

Potential Exam Qs:
    1. Primary mechanisms of reproductive isolation?
    2. How does isolation lead to speciation?
    3. Examples of pre vs. postzygotic barriers?

4. Biogeography, Speciation & Extinction
Key Concepts:

    · Biogeography -- Who lives where and why, across time and space
             o Biogeography
             o The study of the spatial & temporal distribution of biodiversity
             o Field of study initiated by Darwin and Wallace
             o Integrates multiple fields
             o Biology (ecology, physiology, evolution)
             o Geology (continental drift, plate uplifting, volcanism)
             o Geography
             o Paleontology
What accounts for the observed global patterns?
Historical Biogeography: Study of how historical processes have influenced present-day
biogeographical patterns

    · Dispersal -- Species move to new locations (Movement from one geographic location
         to another)

    · Vicariance -- Geographic barriers split populations apart (Formation of geographic
         barriers to dispersal and gene flow) Common example: Plate tectonics
· When land masses break apart, lineages become separated
· Phylogeny of the lineages should reflect the history of the land mass

· Phylogeography: study of historical processes (vicariance & dispersal) that may be
    responsible for current distributions. Accomplished by merging phylogeny with
    geography

    Area phylogeny: A phylogenetic comparison of land masses or locations.

· Used to approximate times when lineages separated
· Both processes account for closely-related species occurring in disjunct locations
· Tectonic plates and continental drift

· Marsupial evolution
· Most diverse in Australia
· Oldest fossils are from China and North America
 Molecular phylogeny of extant marsupial
 species

     · Australia marsupials are monophyletic
     · Australian clade is nested within the

          South American marsupials
     · North American species also nested

          within South American species

Marsupial phylogeny based on fossil record

Branching pattern reflects order in which continents separated from each other
                                                                    · Oldest marsupial fossil in China
                                                                        (150 mya)
                                                                    · Dispersed to North America (~120
                                                                        mya)
                                                                    · New lineages evolved over next
                                                                        ~55 my
                                                                    · New species spread back to Europe,
                                                                        North Africa, and Central Asia

                                                                    · Another group spread to South
                                                                        America, across Antarctica, and to
                                                                        Australia
                                                                             · Arrived in Australia ~55
                                                                                 mya ­ age of oldest fossil in
                                                                                 Australia

                                                                    · All northern hemisphere lineages
                                                                        went extinct between 30-25 mya

                                                                    · Antarctica split from South
                                                                        America and Australia (vicariance)

                                                                    · 40 million year old fossil in
                                                                        Antarctica, extinction as Antarctica
                                                                        drifted to south pole

                                                                    · South American marsupials
                                                                        diversified

                                                                    · Many (not all) became extinct when
                                                                        isthmus of Panama formed

                                                                    · One species migrated back to North
                                                                        America

                                                                    ·

Australia drifted in isolation for >40 million years

    · Australian marsupials diversified

    · No fossil evidence of placental mammals until ~15 million years ago

             · Around same time when Australia was close to Asia ­ bats and rats then arrived
· Isolated from placental mammals - Convergent evolution occurred as organisms
    filled similar niches
Two contributors to species diversity:
Speciation and Extinction
How does species diversity change through time?
When  greatly exceeds 
Results in rapid speciation and diversification
Adaptive radiation: Evolutionary lineage that has undergone exceptionally rapid diversification
into a variety of lifestyles or ecological niches
Islands are sites of many adaptive radiations

Hawaiian honey creepers
Ancestors colonized Hawaii ~5 million years ago
> 50 species
More than half have gone extinct
17 species persist
Adaptive radiation
Quickly expand to occupy many ecological roles (niches)
Hypothesized to occur in the absence of competitors

    · Emergence of new habitat (e.g., island, lake)
    · Extinction removes potential competitor
    · Novel adaptation (key innovation)
    · Key innovation: adaptation that allows individuals to occupy habitats that were off limits

         to ancestral clades
    · Elutherodactylus frogs
    · >400 species in neotropics
    · Key innovation: Laying eggs on land and direct development
    · Larva is free from competition
Other examples of adaptive radiations
Other examples of adaptive radiations
When  greatly exceeds 
1)
         Dispersal and vicariance affect patterns of diversity through speciation and
         extinction

    2) Relative rates of origination and extinction can lead to rapid diversification of
         species or lead to extinction

    3) Extinction rates typically track origination rates, resulting in relatively stable species
         diversity through time

    4) Adaptive radiations typically occur in the absence of competitors (new habitat,
         extinction, key innovation)

    5) There were 5 mass extinctions during the history of life, and we may be on the verge
         of a 6th mass extinction

Posits that the number of species on an island reflects a balance between immigration and
extinction, and that this balance is strongly shaped by island size and isolation.

    · In general, larger islands and islands closer to a source of colonists tend to have more
         species, while smaller and more isolated islands tend to have fewer.

Core idea
    · MacArthur and Wilson proposed this as a dynamic equilibrium model: as species arrive,
         immigration slows and extinction rises until the two rates balance. That equilibrium helps
         explain why islands differ so much in species richness.

Why it matters
    · The theory is a foundation of ecology and conservation because it predicts that habitat
         fragments can behave like "islands," with small, isolated patches supporting fewer
         species.

Key Terms:
    · Standing Diversity -- # of species in an area at a given time
    · Turnover Rate -- Speed at which species replace each other

Potential Exam Qs:
    1. Dispersal vs. vicariance -- how do they affect biogeography?
    2. What is standing diversity and how is it calculated?
    3. What drives mass extinction events?

5. Conservation & Humans as a Selective Force
Key Concepts:

    · Humans drive evolution through: habitat destruction, selective breeding, pollution
    · Conservation strategies aim to protect biodiversity and reduce human impact
Key Terms:
    · Selective Pressure -- Any factor that affects reproductive success
    · Conservation Biology -- Science of preserving biodiversity
Potential Exam Qs:
    1. How do humans act as selective forces?
    2. Effective conservation strategies for endangered species?
    3. How does biodiversity relate to ecosystem stability?
6. Human Evolution
Key Concepts:

    · Bipedalism began ~6­7 million years ago -- key early hominin adaptation
    · Tracing the evolutionary path from common ancestors  modern humans
Key Terms:
    · Hominids -- Primate family including humans + ancestors
    · Fossil Evidence -- Primary tool for reconstructing human evolution
Potential Exam Qs:
    1. What evidence supports bipedalism evolving in hominids?
    2. Significance of early hominin fossils found in Chad?
    3. How did environment shape human evolution?

7. Evolutionary Medicine
Key Concepts:

    · Diseases shape human biology -- and vice versa
    · Antibiotic resistance = evolution in real time, driven by human overuse
Key Terms:
    · Co-evolution -- Two species influencing each other's evolution (e.g., host + pathogen)
    · Virulence -- How harmful/deadly a pathogen i
Potential Exam Qs:
    1. How do pathogens evolve alongside human hosts?
    2. Role of natural selection in antibiotic resistance?
    3. How does our modern lifestyle affect disease evolution?
Applies genetics to the conservation and restoration of biodiversity
